<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="pt-br" xml:lang="pt-br" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8"/>
  <meta name="generator" content="pandoc"/>
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0, user-scalable=yes"/>
  <title>Bibliografia</title>
  <style>
    html {
      line-height: 1.5;
      font-family: Georgia, serif;
      font-size: 20px;
      color: #1a1a1a;
      background-color: #fdfdfd;
    }
    body {
      margin: 0 auto;
      max-width: 36em;
      padding-left: 50px;
      padding-right: 50px;
      padding-top: 50px;
      padding-bottom: 50px;
      hyphens: auto;
      overflow-wrap: break-word;
      text-rendering: optimizeLegibility;
      font-kerning: normal;
    }
    @media (max-width: 600px) {
      body {
        font-size: 0.9em;
        padding: 1em;
      }
    }
    @media print {
      body {
        background-color: transparent;
        color: black;
        font-size: 12pt;
      }
      p, h2, h3 {
        orphans: 3;
        widows: 3;
      }
      h2, h3, h4 {
        page-break-after: avoid;
      }
    }
    p {
      margin: 1em 0;
    }
    a {
      color: #1a1a1a;
    }
    a:visited {
      color: #1a1a1a;
    }
    img {
      max-width: 100%;
    }
    h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6 {
      margin-top: 1.4em;
    }
    h5, h6 {
      font-size: 1em;
      font-style: italic;
    }
    h6 {
      font-weight: normal;
    }
    ol, ul {
      padding-left: 1.7em;
      margin-top: 1em;
    }
    li > ol, li > ul {
      margin-top: 0;
    }
    blockquote {
      margin: 1em 0 1em 1.7em;
      padding-left: 1em;
      border-left: 2px solid #e6e6e6;
      color: #606060;
    }
    code {
      font-family: Menlo, Monaco, 'Lucida Console', Consolas, monospace;
      font-size: 85%;
      margin: 0;
    }
    pre {
      margin: 1em 0;
      overflow: auto;
    }
    pre code {
      padding: 0;
      overflow: visible;
      overflow-wrap: normal;
    }
    .sourceCode {
     background-color: transparent;
     overflow: visible;
    }
    hr {
      background-color: #1a1a1a;
      border: none;
      height: 1px;
      margin: 1em 0;
    }
    table {
      margin: 1em 0;
      border-collapse: collapse;
      width: 100%;
      overflow-x: auto;
      display: block;
      font-variant-numeric: lining-nums tabular-nums;
    }
    table caption {
      margin-bottom: 0.75em;
    }
    tbody {
      margin-top: 0.5em;
      border-top: 1px solid #1a1a1a;
      border-bottom: 1px solid #1a1a1a;
    }
    th {
      border-top: 1px solid #1a1a1a;
      padding: 0.25em 0.5em 0.25em 0.5em;
    }
    td {
      padding: 0.125em 0.5em 0.25em 0.5em;
    }
    header {
      margin-bottom: 4em;
      text-align: center;
    }
    #TOC li {
      list-style: none;
    }
    #TOC a:not(:hover) {
      text-decoration: none;
    }
    code{white-space: pre-wrap;}
    span.smallcaps{font-variant: small-caps;}
    span.underline{text-decoration: underline;}
    div.column{display: inline-block; vertical-align: top; width: 50%;}
    div.hanging-indent{margin-left: 1.5em; text-indent: -1.5em;}
    ul.task-list{list-style: none;}
  </style>
  <script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-chtml-full.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<!--[if lt IE 9]>
    <script src="//cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/html5shiv/3.7.3/html5shiv-printshiv.min.js"></script>
  <![endif]-->
</head>

<body>
  <header id="title-block-header">
    <h1 class="title">Bibliografia</h1>
  </header>

  <div class="thebibliography">
    <p><span>9</span> Behr, Merlyn J.; Wachsmuth, Ipke; Post, Thomas R.; Lesh, Richard. Order and Equivalence of Rational Numbers: A Clinical Teaching Experiment. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, v. 15, n. 15, p. 323-341, 198 4. Confrey, J.; Maloney, A.; Nguyen, K.; Mojica, G.; Myers, M. Equipartitioning/Splitting as A Foundation of Rational Number Reasoning using Learning Trajectories. Proceedings of the 33rd Conference of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education (p. 345–353). Thessaloniki, Greece, 2009. Cramer, Kathleen; Behr, Merlyn; Post, Thomas; Lesh, Richard. Rational Number Project: Initial Fraction Ideas. University of Minnesota, 2009. Empson, Susan B. Equal Sharing and Shared Meaning: The Development of Fraction Concepts in A First-Grade Classroom. Cognition and Instruction, v. 17, n. 3, p. 283-342, 1999. Freitag, Mark A. Mathematics for Elementary School Teachers: A Process Approach. Cengale Learning, 2014. Garcez, Wagner Rohr. Tópicos sobre O Ensino de Frações: Equivalência. Trabalho de Conclusão de Curso do PROFMAT, Instituto de Matemática Pura e Aplicada, 2013. IES PRACTICE GUIDE WHAT WORKS CLEARINGHOUSE. Developing Effective Fractions Instruction for Kindergarten Through 8th Grade. Institute of Education Sciences, 2010. - Este relatório oferece um conjunto de diretivas, procedimentos e cuidados no ensino de frações nas séries iniciais que foram compilados a partir de relatos de experiência e estudos científicos. Lewin, Renaio; López, Alejandro; Martínez, Salomé; Rojas, Daniela; Zanocco, Pierina. Números para Futuros Profesores de Educación Básica. ReFIP Matemática: Recursos para La Formación Inicial de Profesores Educación Básica. Ediciones SM Chile S.A., 2013. Litwiller, Bonnie H. Making Sense of Fractions, Ratios, and Proportions: 2002 Yearbook. National Council of Teache rs of Mathematics. 2002. Mathematics Navigator. Misconceptions and Errors. America’s Choice. Pearson, 2016. McNamara, Julie; Shaughnessy, Meghan M. Beyond Pizzas and Pies, Grades 3-5, Second Edition: 10 Essential Strategies for Supporting Fraction Sense. Math Solutions Publications, 2015. MEC, Brasil. Números Racionais: Conceito e Representação (TP6). Programa Gestão da Aprendizagem Escolar GESTAR I. 2007. Monteiro, Cecília; Pinto, Hélio. Desenvolvendo O Sentido de Número Racional. Associação de Professores de Matemática, 2009. Musser, Gary L.; Peterson, Blacke E.; Burger, William F. Mathematics for Elementary Teachers: A Contemporary Approach. John Wiley <span class="math inline">\(\&amp;\)</span> Sons, Inc., 2014. Ni, Yujing. How Valid is It To Use Number Lines to Measure Children’s Conceptual Knowledge about Rational Number? Educational Psychology: An International Journal of Experimental Educational Psychology, v. 20, n. 2, p. 139-152, 2000. Pearn, Catherine; Stephens, Max. Why You Have To Probe To Discover What Year 8 Students Really Think about Fractions. MERGA 27, v. 2, p. 430-437, 2004. Pereira, Ana Paula Cabral Couto. O Ensino de Frações na Escola Básica: O Currículo Common Core nos EUA, Hung-Hsi Wu e Uma Análise Comparativa em Dois Livros Didáticos do PNLD. Dissertação (Mestrado Profissional em Rede Nacional PROFMAT), Universidade Federal Fluminense, 2015. Petit, Marjorie M.; Laird, Robert E.; Marsden, Edwin L. A focus On Fractions: Bringing Research To The Classroom. Studies in Mathematical Thinking and Learning. Taylor <span class="math inline">\(\&amp;\)</span> Francis, 2010. Post, Thomas R.; Wachsmuth, Ipke; Lesh, Richard; Behr, Merlyn J. Order and Equivalence of Rational Number: A Cognitive Analysis. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education v. 16, v. 1, p. 18-36, 1985. Pothier, Yvone; Sawada, Daiyo. Partitioning: The Emergence of Rational Number Ideas in Young Children. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, v. 14, n. 4, p. 307-317, 1983. Schliemann, Analúcia; Carraher, David W.; Caddle, Mary C. From Seeing Points To Seeing Intervals in Number Lines in Graphs. Em: Brizuela, Bárbara M.; Gravel, Brian E. (Ed.). Show Me What You Know, Teachers College, Columbia University, 2013. Small, Marian. Uncomplicating FRACTIONS To Meet Common Core Standards in Math, K-7. Teachers College Press, 2013. Spangler, David B. Strategies for Teaching Fractions: Using Error Analysis for Intervention and Assessment. Corwin, 2011. Tierney, Cornelia; Berle-Carman, Mary. Fractions: Fair Shares. Investigations in Number, Data, and Space. Dale Seymour Publications, 1998. Tierney, Cornelia. Different Shapes, Equal Pieces: Fractions and Area. Investigations in Number, Data, and Space. Scott Foresman, 2004. Thomaidis, Yannis; Tzanakis, Constantinos. The Notion of Historical “parallelism” Revisited: Historical Evolution and Students’ Conception of The Order Relation On The Number Line. Educational Studies in Mathematics, v. 66, p. 165-183, 2007. Vamvakoussi, Xenia; Vosniadou,Stella. Bridging the Gap Between the Dense and the Discrete: The Number Line and the “Rubber Line” Bridging Analogy. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, v. 14, n. 4, p. 265-284, 2012. DOI: 10.1080/10986065.2012.717378. - Este artigo faz um resumo histórico de como a noção de densidade surgiu. Vance, James H. Understanding Equivalence: A Number by Any Other Name. School Science and Mathematics, v. 92, n. 5, p. 263-266, 1992. Van de Walle, John A. Matemática no Ensino Fundamental. Formação de Professores e Aplicação em Sala de Aula. Sexta edição. Artmed, 2009. Ventura, Hélia Margarida Gaspar Lopes. A Aprendizagem de Números Racionais através das Conexões entre As Suas Representações: Uma Experiência de Ensino no 2.o Ciclo do Ensino Básico. Tese de doutorado, Instituto de Educação, Universidade de Lisboa, 2013. Wu, Hung-Hsi. Understanding Numbers in Elementary School Mathematics. American Mathematical Society, 2011.</p>
  </div>
</body>
</html>